that was actually the task to talk about
it open your imaging and then I thought
well what would the crowd look like and
do they want to know the happy story and
probably you won't want one so I I went
for something else it's still related to
the topic so it's like completely
actually so just you know quick
run-through to so where I'm coming from
from the science perspective I think we
should be able to read those images and
not in the sense of you know which of
four alternatives is this we should
really understand what this is and some
other people who got rewarded by the
system agree with that perspective and I
don't think reading those images should
result in a paper it should result in
something that we somebody can build
probably in China that you can you can
buy and use right to read out the state
of a complex you know organism part like
like the brain and I think everybody
agrees with me this is this is utopia
and that's not in five years it's not in
ten years it's probably not in 20 years
but the the the state in which we are
struggling is still to make it you know
a distinction between what is noise and
what is inter individual variability
what is intra-individual variability we
basically have very little clue about
things and if I would have time and I
would stick to the topic I would have
told you that there are stuff that you
can do in terms of functional alignment
go away from center space go towards
current you know cortical tuning
functions and so on I would have shown
you a few bits where you can do almost
magic things by applying a small linear
transformation and it would lead you to
something that you could you capture as
a labeled high dimensional brain state
space that you could use to you know
read out things and I would have second
you know confess that I'm a psychologist
and there are ways to you know get a
sense of high dimensional spaces by
asking lots of questions and doing
factor analysis all kinds of stuff and
then I would have be depressed to tell
you that this is an intractable problem
that we are not capable of solving
because there's just too much data
too many dimensions too much money that
would be required to no individual lab
can do that and I would have raised your
spirits again and
you that in in in in synthetic biology
they have attract attacked problems like
this and they were very successfully
doing so on a year-by-year basis doing
pretty much some sort of
institutionalized crowdfunding of
innovation which is really impressive
and and I think we should have something
like this in your imaging in open
neuroimaging that's the connection right
so I won't tell you any about that what
I will do is I will just say that in
order to try to you know push in the
direction of that movement we we
released an open data set now four years
ago and published that in in in
scientific data which basically we had
data recorded from people listening to a
version of the movie Forrest blood of
Forrest Gump for the blind you know in
the seventy for two hours and recorded
everything else that the machine can do
and then we just released that data
no hypothesis-driven project whatsoever
we just we didn't we didn't we did QA
analysis of data we did nothing else
hoping that it would be attractive to
some people so they could you know pick
it up and then we invested a few more
years of work and and now this data set
we have first for some participants over
14 hours of fMRI of various types rich
annotations of the the movie stimulus
you can you can have that if you want
all kinds of structural data analysis
and and I think it's a really cool thing
it's it's in a public domain you need to
don't need to go to any sort of you know
pretty fancy repository in sign of
something you just go to that sites 34
so the work you get an overview of the
papers and the studies had used it and
so on you could go and play with it now
the reason why we published this was we
wanted to attract collaborations pretty
much without actually having to
collaborate with these people just give
them something that's well described
enough kind of as a social psychology
experiment if that would be useful or
even the sufficient condition for people
to to to work with other people today
because everybody who's trying to work
with other people's data knows that this
is almost it's not a very pleasant
experience most of the time right it's
written with frustration under
determined descriptions and so on so the
question is where are we four years
after the project and was it been worth
it was it worth being open and going
into the open and and as at this point
we have sixteen additional independent
published studies that used the data and
virtually all of them are pursuing
questions that we wouldn't have never
have asked so not a single one of them
is a scoop in any sense of the word
there are actually publications
among those where I don't even
understand I don't I don't know the
words in the title which you know tells
you something about me or about the the
craziness of the papers and so you could
think think of the project as a
substantial boost in return of
investment of the taxpayer right because
they paid for the acquisition of datas
at once independent of what its purpose
was and and they're still getting
revenue so those 16 published papers are
not the end of the thing right things
are happening all the time and there's a
there's a publication from from from
here too
so it it I think the the the the buzz
the positive takeaway is that inspired
work like this by others so now you can
you can see many more data sets like
this pop up I'm not saying that this is
the causal trigger for this kind of
thing but it just helps to you know
amass a critical mass but did we make
the most out of it I don't think so and
not in the slightest
I every you know two weeks probably
there is a group approaching me saying
okay can we have this in that and I say
sure II can do you have data like this
and say yeah it's not published but sure
you can and and they all promise like
back contributions into the project by
making their own stuff public and and up
until very very recently those have all
been seemingly empty
now we know that scientific projects
take a while so I don't know you know
what is there what is the reason for
that maybe didn't find anything you have
anything could be the case but I'm
constantly giving people access and
there is literally nothing coming back
right so in in in in the sense of you
know having kicked off something that is
then some sort of perpetual machine it's
just a giant failure that's what it is
and what's even more embarrassing is
that the starting point for users trying
to use that data set today is pretty
much exactly identical to the point four
years ago which is an entire PhD
lifecycle right there should have been
something but other than the additional
data that we put into the data set it
almost nothing happens this is this is
about to change I think but it's it's
just give you a sense of how long things
things take so the question is why like
why is it not going you know everybody
talking about open sign things would be
faster and you do things and
pre-register and you know knowledge
amassing will just be almost instant and
it's just not going to happen from from
from my perspectives so the question is
anything that we can we can we can take
away and one thing that is really
critical is that everyone who's
attempting open science would understand
that whatever your special you're doing
it wrong and and we were special in the
beginning because there was no you know
no beats at that point where you could
you know this matter that they either
stand or fine structuring standard that
you could put your data into so we went
with the thing that we felt was the most
prolific
at the time which was an open my data
portal in-house standard and it just
turned out not to scale right so we
participated in this reporting standards
effort that was mentioned before in the
development of the bit standard and also
in the project with Steven on you know
how to you know you know structure and
and what are the important aspect in in
in sharing analysis code in order to
have something that
can be referred to then say I'm just
doing what is described in there and you
don't have to follow me you can follow
this community effort and give people a
sense that their investment in sticking
to something is not just you know a one
of thing that will invalidate itself in
six months but it's it's something
there's really a worthwhile investment
so and I kind of speculated that
somebody would have mentioned the fair
principles at this point in this
audience nobody did I don't have the
time to go about them but there is a
thing an acronym really that was
discovered how to describe how data
should be in its fair
they should be findable accessible
interoperable and reusable and if you go
to this thing go there you can read all
about this it's it's it's not really a
new discovery like if you if you there
were there were iterations of this
thought before but I think today this is
the most compact most comprehensible
description of what it involves these
are the in the first level principles
I'm not even going through them they
turn out to be more complicated then one
would hope for to actually implement
them for any sort of data portal and
data set and they certainly don't seem
to be targeted towards an individual
researcher like a PhD student but more
like an again like an effort how it
should be in general for an institution
for data portal and that kind of thing
there is one thing that I find missing
for some reason in all this discussion
about the the the fair principles as a
direct experience from working with our
data set and working with other people
working with our data set which is the
time dimension right and the thing is if
you do open signs right and open science
in the sense of I give something to the
general public in order to have the
general public be able to do something
with it right then that's a process that
by definition cannot really have an end
right so at the moment where you stop
investing in that thing that you shared
you basically start
the stopwatch when it will make itself
obsolete
why is that because even if you if you
have something that is fair findable
accessible interoperable reusable today
right the world is constantly changing
and code that runs today will not run
tomorrow it's almost guaranteed there
won't run tomorrow if you put something
in a fancy data repository that is
really awesome today it's replaced by
some other thing tomorrow and your thing
will not be finding and won't be as
accessible anymore so the time dimension
really has to be factored into the
process and it's not and if you think
about you you know if data data is
really an artifact right once I have it
it's fixed that is not the case because
the data we work with is not a natural
observation like a stone that I pick up
and put into a closet it's it's a
digital object that has an evolution
even at the point where you think it's
raw right there there have been things
done to it and in order to put it into a
releasable form you do many more things
to it and they all involve software
written by people who are not software
developers it's guaranteed to be buggy
there will be things that are broken and
if you look at the change look of the
study forest dataset you'll find tons of
them tons of things that were broken and
our entire sharing infrastructure is not
capable of dealing with it if you go to
the official repositories the officially
recognized repositories that are
scientific data mandates for example
they exclusively have an outdated
version of the study forest data set
that is buggy as hell because there is
no update mechanism right and that's
kind of strange right especially if you
know software developers are working
with github right it's it's kind of
weird right why is data something other
than like it's bits and bits and one is
you know fixed and the other one is
allowed to change and it's just not
working and and it translates also to
the data representation right bits today
is the is the hot thing that everybody
uses it will I guarantee you that
eventually be replaced by something that
is even better than that even if nobody
can think about it right now and all the
data in bits format right now will need
to get an update to the other up
standard and and there is no
infrastructure or even a mindset in
place
order to do that so what we tried over
the past three years is to take the what
we've learned from from working with the
dead and other urban data sets and and
turn it into a tool that is capable of
helping with some aspects of of this and
the tools called data let and it's it's
it's basically a software suite that
ain't managing the evolution of digital
objects not only code not only data but
the combination of everything that
involves digital workflows for science
and on the sidelines and also yields
there are fair resources that you could
share if you are inclined to do so but
it's it's it's built into the thing but
it's not a requirement not everything
needs to be shared so few points on the
the principles that underlie this the
software before I will give a few
examples I will only be able to scratch
the surface it is a general purpose tool
so it's not specific to newer imaging
more to neuroscience or to you know any
anything that it could be associated
with with a single domain it only cares
about two things data sets and files
right we all work with file most people
work with files no everybody works with
files some people work with database
servers this thing cares about data sets
which is a collection of files and
folders the things that we have on our
computers and work with and the the
smallest unit in it is a file that's
what it cares about so it's basically a
content management system that operates
on the units of of files a data set in
data line is a git repository so what
we've learned in the in the previous
talk about you know what we can use git
for to track versions and so on and so
on applies to everything that's managed
by day ahead equally well because it
used the same technology underneath
purpose of this technology is or the
advantage of this technology is it's not
science specific the entire planet uses
this if this goes away it will be
replaced by something that is guaranteed
to be better or we have the zombie
apocalypse and and there will be a
massive
transition to go from this system to
whatever the next system is that I don't
have to pay for and that's a huge huge
advantage so in addition that data set
can have a so-called annex that is
optional which makes it possible to
track terabytes and petabytes of of
content in a git repository something
that you cannot do with get directly
because it becomes really really slow
once you exceed a few few gigabytes we
we use a tool called git annex which is
pure magic it's written in a language
that nobody understands as a bus factor
of one sadly if you you know know all
about the bus factor but it's absolutely
magical and it's not a scientific
project some of you might have or might
know about the the the Internet Archive
right they back up the internet which
sounds like a lot right that's done wiki
radix for example so it's it can handle
things the there is one that's called
social principle that we that we have
deep in the core of data led which is we
do things in a way that don't introduce
custom data structures that cannot be
understood after this project dies right
and it will die I guarantee you that we
have a boss factor of five at the moment
we're right you know in the in the
medium and that means it will die at
some point it's not that reliant on
external funding right now but it will
die so the question is if you adopt that
are you willing to bet your career on
mine and probably you won't and and so
anything that you do in here actually
uses data structures that are not
specific to this application they're
specific to something that is globally
used and other than that relies on text
file formats that are properly marked up
so you could understand them in a sort
of software archeology type sense and we
have complete decentralization in the
system so there's no requirement at any
point to maintain a central
infrastructure that somebody needs to
pay for like your laptop is a perfectly
capable central infrastructure that this
thing can use but in addition it is made
to use
much all the central infrastructure that
we have from picture to get up to you
know institutional repositories
whatsoever we should be able to
interface with that may be minimal
adjustment if you're really special but
there there is no required central
infrastructure but you can harvest all
the benefits from cellular
infrastructure if you want and that's
that's pretty much what it is and which
is sufficiently abstract to not
understand a thing single thing so I'll
give you a few examples of how it looks
like daylight in its core is a
command-line interface so it has a
command-line interface and a Python API
so I will show you actual code it's
almost trivial to and to put that into
UI if somebody would have the resources
and sufficient energy to do it but right
now it's it's an infrastructure tool so
here is how it looks like to obtain a
data set from some sort of database
doesn't matter what it is what you say
is data let install and give the URL for
the data set that's it like that's
that's like downloading a file
internally it actually has unique
globally unique identifiers for both the
data set what it stands for what its
semantics purpose is in life and the
location of where a data set has its
data content that attracts which could
be many those are internally as users we
don't want to see them that's why it
goes this way so what happens is you get
some sort of local representation of
what is on the server without actually
having to have all the data so general
is just a few kilobytes or megabytes
that you have and now you can't get
individual file content in that data set
by just asking for a give me the content
of the file that is at this path right
so you see a normal regular
representation of the data set content
on your on your in your file browser
right it just doesn't have any content
on until it is obtained and internally
there's all reference by cryptographic
hashes so you know precisely what
version of a file you're working with
and anything that you do with that knows
that it used this specific version of
that file not even
entire data set release so but the
entire data set also maintains a an idea
of history so you can have a local
version it's a decentralized system
right you have a local version of that
data set like a local git repository and
the database might introduce an update
and you can ask the Atlanteans to update
the information that knows about all the
the other locations and that information
becomes available here and you can you
can do things like daily update me the
local one and all the files that I
obtained before right which might be a
subset of what is actually in the data
set you have big data set you're only
interested in two files you don't want
to have the two terabytes that it
contains so it's only the two files you
run this line it will get the new
version from the database and then read
obtain the content of the files that you
were interested in you were interested
in and only those and update them if you
if you want that so it's it's quite neat
so all of that would have described so
far you could do if you're sufficiently
proficient with Gideon genetics you
could do more less by hand it wouldn't
be as compact as this one but it is all
doable but those tools cannot do is
interlink those datasets so we can we
can nest data set into each other which
sounds abstract but I'll give you an
example in a second so technically it
looks like this
I tell data led to install into the data
set that is in a current folder another
data set that is obtained from this URL
under this name right and what happens
is that this is just a representation of
the change in the indicate content so it
really is a few lines of text it weighs
a few bytes therefore so connecting data
sets it's a really a lightweight thing
but what enables you to do is you can
now compose data analysis project trees
out of modular components that come from
different sources and are taken care of
by different people and have their
different evolutions and you still have
a consistent tree that you know
precisely which version of which piece
you are using to produce particular
analysis outputs so if you go through
here this is an analysis code analysis
folder project a right it has a code
a directory that contains a reference
this is like a data set link to keep
repository of a third-party library that
your code is using you can have other
stuff in here there's stuff that you
track directly in the repository of that
analysis because it it's relevant for
that now this what is Dallas it's about
where was it published that kind of
thing you link a input data of
pre-processed data right if you have a
raw data set you pre-process it maybe in
four different ways for particular
things and then from those four you can
conduct 25 different analysis each right
you don't want to duplicate that's not
because somebody has to pay for this
space in this thing you can just say I
want this particular version of that
pre-processed flavor of the data set and
I built this analysis from and all these
links are pairwise so you're not you
know ingesting all the dependencies that
you're you're you're specifying they can
live wherever they live and they are
obtained on demand whenever you need
them and you can verify programmatically
that you have not made any changes to
them and throw them away again while
retaining the version information and so
you can repeat the process even without
having to take a care of backups of
other people's code which is really
useful if you don't trust these people
and don't trust people they mess things
up if they don't if they haven't messed
it up right now they will mess it up
over time I guarantee you and those data
set linkages could be arbitrarily deep
right so the preprocessdataset
can reference its original raw data set
to which you might never get access
because it's not the identified etc but
you have a cryptographic link to the
identity of the data set so if there's
ever any problem you can at least email
the people and tell them I use this
specific version of that thing and I
think it's buggy can you check that for
me right most published open data that
you can get anywhere today
does not have that ability you can email
those people and they will either ignore
you and say this is really out of our
reach with this one you can do it what's
even more amazing for me in my day to
day life is you can now use this
technology to also include the
transformations that were done to turn
pre-process data into an
how's this results and capture all the
information necessary in the same data
sets so you give you two examples of
command lines that run
so here's it's basically what you would
do in a command line you take there's a
compute all script that just does it
right that computer all script is
tracked in the version control system so
you know precisely what it did at the
time where you ran that command and they
know that if you pre prefix that in the
simplest way with data like run it will
record that you ran this specific
command on this version of the input
data which is also track them later set
with these parameters and make a record
that is programmatically actionable so
you can rerun the same pipeline that you
recorded in that data set on a different
flavor of the of the of the input data
and compare results and you can do this
in a way that a machine understands and
can track them so you don't get confused
and your your error rate gets minimized
what is even cooler is that now nowadays
we have computational container
singularity containers docker containers
that it can encapsulate the entire
computational environments these are
practically just files any file could go
in a data set so you can track the
container like here an I learn container
in the data set so you're not only
capturing the input data the code that
runs but also the computational
environment in which was executed and
all the parameters that were necessary
in order to kick off that computation
and the results that it produced at the
same time in the same repository right
without having to duplicate any input
data whatsoever so you're really just
capturing the essence of what your
analysis about and nothing else but you
keep precise information about nothing
else so what we additionally have is the
support to extract to work with metadata
for your data and metadata is absolutely
key it's key for you to rediscover what
you actually did it's key for you to to
discover who had what scan at which
scanner from what time frame with the
time window software version of the
scanner etc which type of code you used
on what kind of analysis because it was
buggy at the time so which papers are
affected
all metadata is necessary for making
those queries and data light is
basically I'll not go through this
because they don't have time but the we
have support for arbitrarily area mounts
an arbitrary structured metadata in an
arbitrary number of metadata standards
right so whatever metadata standard for
whatever purpose you like best today
your opinion will change and it's
guaranteed that your metadata standard
of choice is not able to capture
something completely different that also
needs to be captured so in in daylight
you don't have to decide for a metadata
standard you can have simultaneously
multiple ones supported which also eases
transition from one metadata standard to
another and the key here is that nobody
curates metadata manually because the
manual process is the most expensive
process that you can think of if you do
it once you'll never do it again because
you now you know how much it costs right
so at the point where you detach
metadata from data
it's basically outdated and wrong it's
just a matter of time so in daylight we
do this automatically and if you want to
extract metadata you just you have to
codify how you get from the data to the
metadata and if you can't codify it it's
a process you shouldn't attempt anyway
because it's already wrong if you're
doing it manually and that extraction
can run repeatedly so if metadata needs
to be updated a new standard better
markup better terms right a machine can
do this because you just need to change
the script that made that metadata
extraction metadata can also be
separated from the datasets and moved
into super datasets so if you think
about metadata in the world icon data
set of a neuroimaging
it can move all the way up to a dataset
that contains the manuscript that
references the results that you
published that references the
pre-processed data that references the
raw data and at the very top the data
set that you share you can inquire all
the way down to you know what was the
echo time of the sequence that brent
sometimes that's relevant right and of
course you can decide what kind of
information you want to share what this
enables is you can build apps like bits
decided
anybody who is who submitted a dataset
to scientific data knows they they asked
you to curate metadata in some fancy way
that involves axel there is there's
based on this meditative representation
this can be automatic so I could convert
your bits metadata in in their format in
probably I don't know two minutes
including the download time that it that
it that it takes and you will probably
spend the day on it so I should be paid
for that I think and and and this just
just just demo at this point because the
utility of those tools obviously depend
on the quality of the metadata and
nobody's taking care of that give you
one example just pay attention to this
command it's as long as it utilizes data
let's search functionality which does
not require any database server it's
just a flat file search what this thing
does is if you install data light on
your machine it will obtain a reference
data set that tracks all kinds of data
portals all the data sets in all kinds
of data portals and this is the question
that says give me all of all the files
this is what this says all the files
that have a bit subject sex property
that is female a bits type property that
is t1 and a bit subject 8 property that
is 24 so it gives you the T ones that it
knows of all the female 24 year-olds
regardless of where the data was
published right and and this is a you
know visualization of the structure
record that you get this is obviously
for machines but you can you can see
that it represents all the individual
metadata side-by-side so here's bits
there's nifty metadata it gives you a
direct download URLs of where versions
of files that have these properties were
published and it tells you what actually
matched so you see doesn't have to be a
direct reference and this is all
possible without any sort of fancy
indexing technology and takes for 14
terabytes and the million files about
minute 20 right so if you put that in a
database it becomes
laughter but you don't have to you can
publish with data let just just briefly
to all kinds of commercial services and
institutional institutionally used
technologies you can use data encryption
if you think that's necessary for your
data you can have configurable
permissions and authorization schemes so
basically data let's separates the
management of data identity and metadata
from the actual storage so you can share
information about your data set with
people freely and openly but you can
arbitrarily hard lock down access to
actual data content and those could be
managed completely separately so you can
have you can use your library to host
your data and they can have whatever
procedure to to perform authorization
and their life can just manages the ID
identity and so data sets are typically
lightweight I have not yet seen that
data set is larger than 10 megabytes for
just tracking the identity you can
attach those as a tarball to
publications it's no problem there are
machine readable they support redundant
storage so he can insure yourself
against a failure of your own career you
can ensure the data set against failure
of your own career you vanishing from
the surface of the scientific planet
from your institution closing down the
storage that you picked as the most
awesome at the time right the closing
down of publishers of data portals like
like picture they're all commercial
entities they go away it's guaranteed
right the data set like this weighs
almost nothing and can track identity in
multiple places for the same objects at
the same time and of course it can be
updated and also the data set is not
attached to you and if you put that on
github that data set it's compatible
with github you can take it and become
the curator of something that you think
is a valuable resource for the future
even if the original authors don't think
about it anymore so you can you can be
your own library curator if you want and
you can afford it
data I can do many things but it's it's
intended to be extended by third parties
that don't have to talk to you to the
authors of data light so you can you can
write
extensions with a separate Python
packages that people can install from
you it just pulls in the data like core
pieces we have stuff to to work with
containerized environments stuff
describe web resources neuroimaging
based tools metadata extractors a
workflows for automatic bits conversion
that kind of stuff everybody wants that
remote code execution on cluster cloud
great services a thing that you can
build a REST API with it there is a
stuff that there's stuff that you can
build web UIs for datasets with that you
can expose search and I'll pretty much
end with this slide which shows you how
what kind of different ways you can
connect datasets to each other so here's
the example of a paper I mentioned
before paper references and analysis
uses a my pre-processed data set that
came from a raw data set in bits format
that was derived from an raw data set
that nobody can have and those could be
hosted on open you open you are actually
using data line as the storage back-end
so they are managing their own data sets
with this one you can go to get help and
download all the data sets there are an
open euro with data led and during an
entire history which is quite neat and
all the individual pieces of content in
those data sets you can publish to
lockdown databases or public databases
and you can decide where you put each
individual pieces file-by-file within
the data set right so you have almost
complete flexibility I know you know
some people are saying right these are
the two things that you actually need in
order to get into that system so two
commands that you run one at the
beginning of every project you run
they'll address create ref is prefixed
we don't have to talk about this creates
a data set right and then everything
else you have to do from there on is to
call ref save whenever you think a
meaningful milestone has been reached
and that depends on your personal flavor
every single change file could be one
you could watch that directory
automatically and have this command run
all the time you can apply meaningful
messages to this one which communicate
to
you what was changed you can use this
light kit it uses get underneath it's
just a bit simpler and this will work
with hierarchies of datasets with get
which get cannot do so it you can you
can manage compositions of datasets that
you assembled for a particular purpose
so I'll end with that acknowledging
these people who are the the core daily
developers including Joey has whose
amazing who writes key Lennox and I
encourage you to go to these websites
before for demos for example data lat
org
this is a side datasets that they let
the orc which runs the stock data light
insulation and exposes I think right now
is something like 14 terabytes of open
data from all kinds of portals which is
the data set that you get obtained if
you run data light search Thanks
[Applause]